UMPIRING FOR BEGINNERS

THE LAWS OF CRICKET
THE PREAMBLE – THE SPIRIT OF CRICKET
Cricket is a game that owes much of its unique appeal to the fact that it should be played
not only within its Laws but also within the Spirit of the Game. Any action which is seen to
abuse this spirit of fair play rests with the captains.
1. There are two Laws which place the responsibility for the team’s conduct firmly on the
captain.

Responsibility of captains
The captains are responsible at all times for ensuring that play is conducted within the Spirit
of the game as well as within the Laws.

Player’s conduct
In the event of a player failing to comply with instructions by an umpire, or criticising by
word or action the decisions of an umpire, or showing dissent, or generally behaving in a
manner which might bring the game into disrepute, the umpire concerned shall in the first
place report the matter to the other umpire and to the player’s captain, and instruct the latter to
take action.

2. Fair and unfair play
According to the Laws the umpires are the sole judges of fair and unfair play.

The umpires may intervene at any time and it is the responsibility of the captain to take action
where required.

3. The umpires are authorised to intervene in cases of:
 Time wasting
 Damaging the pitch
 Dangerous and unfair bowling
 Tampering with the ball
 Any other action that they consider to be unfair

4. The Spirit of the Game involves RESPECT for:
 Your opponents
 Your own captain and team
 The role of the umpires
 The game’s traditional values

5. It is against the Spirit of the Game:
 To dispute an umpire’s decision by word, action or gesture
 To direct abusive language towards an opponent or umpire
 To indulge in cheating or any sharp practice, for instance:
(a) to appeal knowing the batsman is not out
(b) to advance towards an umpire in an aggressive manner when appealing
(c) to seek to distract an opponent either verbally or by harassment with persistent clapping
or unnecessary noise under the guise of enthusiasm and motivation of one’s own side

6. Violence
There is no place for any act of violence on the field of play

7. Players
Captains and umpires together set the tone for the conduct of a cricket match. Every player is
expected to make an important contribution to this.

UMPIRING FOR BEGINNERS

BASIC UMPIRING SKILLS
This paper is to provide some basic skills and knowledge required for a game of cricket to
proceed.
It does not attempt to delve too deeply in to the intricacies of the Laws and deals with
simple application only.
There are matters such as Duty of Care, Health and Safety and Racial & Religious
Vilification that are common to most aspects of daily life. The ideals established under
the laws of the land should generally transfer to the Cricket field.
RESPONSIBILITIES
Duty of care to all participants includes: -
Health and safety principles
Hydration
Sun and eye protection
Protective equipment (helmets, pads, gloves etc)
Basic first aid
Reasonable risk management policies and procedures in relation to the condition of
the pitch and ground as well as weather and light conditions.
PLAYER/MATCH MANAGEMENT
Fair go for all participants
Make the game fun and encourage active participation
Teach respect for each other and the umpire
Instil etiquette and common good manners in players
Do not accept any form of dissent, abuse or sledging
Do not accept vilification in any form (racial or otherwise)
SOME BASIC LAWS
THE PREAMBLE
This sets the desired tone for acceptable behaviour and stresses that the Captain of the team is
responsible for his players. Players are instructed to respect each other, the role of the
Umpires and the game’s traditional values.
There should be no unnecessary appealing, cheating or sharp practice, sledging or
intimidation and definitely no violence.
The Umpire’s decision should be accepted without dissent
Law 1.  THE PLAYERS
Re affirms that the Captain is responsible for the conduct of his players.
Law 12. START OF PLAY: CESSATION OF PLAY
The Umpire at the bowler’s end shall call play to start the match and on resumption after any
interruption/interval.
The Umpire at the bowler’s end shall call time on the cessation of play prior to any
interval/interruption or at the conclusion of the match.
Law 16. THE RESULT
The Umpires are responsible for the correctness of the score. This means that whenever you
can ask the scorers to make sure that the scores add up and are correct. If you leave the field
believing that a result has been reached and there has been a mistake in scoring,
(a) if you have either time or overs left, resume play until the runs are scored or the game

UMPIRING FOR BEGINNERS

finishes otherwise, unless one side concedes defeat.
( b) if time has been reached and no more overs/balls are available, make the necessary
adjustment to the score and advise the captains of the amended result

Law 17. THE OVER
The over consists of 6 fair deliveries.
Overs are bowled from each end alternately.
No balls, wides, dead balls called prior to delivery do not count as a ball in the over.
If an Umpire miscounts the balls then the number as counted shall stand.
A bowler is not permitted to bowl 2 consecutive overs (or part overs) in the same innings.
An over must be finished by a replacement if he cannot finish the over due to injury or
suspension.

Law 18. SCORING RUNS
The score is reckoned by runs.
A run is scored:
(a) each time the batsmen cross and make their ground at the opposite end while the ball is in
play
( b) when a boundary is scored
(c) when penalty runs are awarded (no ball, wide etc)
( d) when lost  ball is called (lost on the field of play)
There are provisions to disallow runs throughout the Laws, the most used being disallowance
of Leg Byes if no attempt to play the ball has been made.
Short runs occur when a batsman fails to make good his ground at the opposite end and then
completes further runs. Only one of the runs is to be disallowed unless he runs short more
than once in the same run sequence. Umpires should watch the batter grounding the bat on
turning for a further run. This generally stops the batsman run ning short (because of being
watched). It is not a common occurrence in most games.
When a batsman is dismissed any penalty runs are still scored (no balls, wides). In some
cases runs scored are permitted (Run Out).
Law 19. BOUNDARIES
The boundary allowance is 4 runs for a ball reaching the boundary (not on the full) and 6 runs
for a ball struck by the batter pitching over the boundary.
Boundaries can be marked in a variety of ways (fence, flags, line etc). The boundary is the
bottom front edge of any line or fence.
Make sure that the boundary, however marked, is agreed prior to the start of the match.
If a fielder touches the boundary while in contact with the ball then a boundary is scored, 6
runs if on the full, 4 runs if not on the full.
Overthrows can happen. If the ball reaches the boundary from an overthrow, the boundary
allowance is scored plus any runs completed together with the run in progress, providing the
batsmen have crossed on that run at the instant of the throw.

Law 20. DEAD BALL
It is important to know when the ball is dead so that nothing untoward can subsequently
occur. The following is a list of when the ball either is automatically dead or is to be called
dead by the Umpire.

AUTOMATICALLY DEAD
(a) finally settled with bowler or wicket keeper

UMPIRING FOR BEGINNERS

( b) a boundary is scored
(c) a batsman is dismissed
( d) becomes trapped between the bat and person of the striker or in items of his clothing
(e) lodges in clothing or equipment of a batsman or Umpire
(f ) lodges in a protective helmet worn by a fielder
( g) the ball is illegally fielded or strikes the fielder’s helmet placed on the ground
( h) penalty runs are awarded
( i) lost ball is called
( j) over or time is called

The ball is to be considered dead when it is clear to the Umpire at the bowler’s end that the
fielders and batsmen have ceased to regard it as in play.

TO BE CALLED DEAD BY EITHER UMPIRE
(a) he intervenes in a case of unfair play
( b) serious injury to player or umpire occurs
(c) he leaves his normal position for consultation
( d) one or both bails fall from the striker’s wicket before he has the opportunity to play the
ball
(e) if for an adequate reason the striker is not ready and does not play at the ball
(f ) the striker is distracted by noise or movement while preparing to receive a delivery
( g) the bowler accidentally drops the ball before delivery
( h) the ball does not leave the bowler’s hand for any reason
( i) there is a requirement to do so under any of the laws

The ball is not counted as one of the over if it has not been delivered.

The ball ceases to be dead when the bowler start his run up, or if he has no run up, his
bowling action for the next delivery.

LAW 21. NO BALL
There are several different reasons for a no ball being called. (Throwing the ball, illegal field
placements, encroachment of fielders, dangerous bowling etc).
By far, the main area to focus on is the placement of the feet by the bowler for each
delivery. This is the most common no ball call.
No Ball, the Feet:
Back foot: the foot must be inside and not touching the inside edge of the return crease when
it lands in the delivery stride.
Front foot: some part of the foot (grounded or raised) must be behind the back edge of the
popping crease when it lands in the delivery stride.
Mode of delivery: The bowler must indicate through the Umpire to the batsman his mode of
delivery (ie -right arm over the wicket). If he then changes without notification to you (to
notify the batsman), no ball is to be called.
Underarm bowling is not permitted unless match regulations allow or there is prior
agreement.
The many other no ball calls require a thorough knowledge of the laws and are invoked only
occasionally.
Out from a no ball:
There are only 4 ways of dismissal from a no ball (run out, obstructing the field, handled the
ball, hit the ball twice). Of these run out is the most prevalent, the others rarely occur.

UMPIRING FOR BEGINNERS

The penalty run for the no ball is scored regardless of what happens.
A no ball call overrides a call of wide.
The ball is not dead because no ball is called.
A no ball does not count in the over (ie it is to be bowled again)
Law 22. WIDE BALL
A wide is adjudged if in the Umpire’s opinion the ball passes so wide of the striker that he is
unable to hit it with a normal cricket stroke.
The batsman cannot create a wide by moving away from the ball making it appear to be too
wide of him.
Remain consistent with your judgement throughout the match. Don’t change your parameters
once the game has started.
It is not a wide if the ball is hit by the striker or touches any part of his clothing or
equipment.
Wait for the ball to pass the striker’s wicket before calling wide.
Out from a wide ball:
There are only 5 ways of dismissal from a wide ball (stumped, run  out, obstructing the field,
handled the ball, hit wicket). The most common being stumped and run out, the others rarely
occur).
The penalty run for the wide is scored regardless of what else happens.
The ball is not dead because wide is called.
A wide does not count in the over (ie. it is to be bowled again).

Law 23. Bye & Leg Bye

Byes If not a no ball or a wide and the ball passes the striker without it touching the
bat or person then byes can be scored.

Leg Byes     If the ball has NO T touched the bat then leg byes can be allowed, providing
the batsman has attempted to play the ball or tried to avoid being hit by the
ball. Runs scored are leg byes unless no ball has been called, then they are
scored as no balls.
If the batsman has made no attempt to play the ball or avoid being hit then leg
byes are not allowed.

Law 27. The Wicket keeper
The wicket keeper is the only fielder permitted to wear protective pads (externally) and
gloves.
The wicket keeper must remain behind the stumps until the striker has played or played at the
ball unless the ball hits the striker or the striker attempts to run.
The wicket keeper is allowed to wear a protective helmet.

Law 28. The Fielder
Fielders are not permitted to wear gloves or external leg guards.
They are permitted to wear protective helmets.
Protective helmets are to be worn or placed on the ground behind the wicket keeper (fielders’
only). Batsmen must wear or carry their helmets.

UMPIRING FOR BEGINNERS

Law 31. Appeals
No decision should be given without an appeal.
Either out, (finger raised) or say not out.
If the batsman decides to “walk” let him do so provided he is out under the laws.

Law 32. Bowled
The batsman is out bowled if a ball, not being a no ball, strikes the wicket and removes the
bails.
Bowled takes precedence over any other form of dismissal.

Law 33. Caught
Striker is out caught if a ball, not being a no ball, is struck by the bat and caught fairly before
touching the ground.
Caught takes precedence over any other form of dismissal other than bowled.
A fair catch is taken when the fielder has complete control over the ball and his own
movement.
We recommend that the fielder should remain within the boundary to complete a catch. (ie.
not touch the line, rope or fence whilst in contact with the ball).

Law 35 Hit Wicket
The striker can be out Hit Wicket if he puts his wicket down (by his bat or person) whi lst
playing at the ball or when immediately taking off for the first run whether he played at the
ball or not.

Law 36 Leg Before Wicket
The striker can be out Leg Before Wicket if a ball, not being a no ball, strikes him on the
person (not just the leg) and,
The ball was not pitched outside leg stump
The ball was not first touched the bat of the striker
The ball is definitely going on to hit the stumps
ONLY GIVE A BATSMAN OUT LBW IF YOU ARE CERTAIN THAT THE LAW IS
SATISFIED IN FULL
It is much better to be hard on LBW rather than to give them easily.
Generally, the further forward a striker is when struck by the ball, the less likely the ball will
go on to hit the stumps, therefore NOT OUT.

Law 38. Run Out
Either batsman can be Run Out if he is out of his crease and the wicket is put down at his end.
The batsman out will be the one closest to the wicket put down at the time it is put down.
Any runs scored from that delivery, prior to the run out are allowed (no ball, wide or runs
completed prior to the dismissal)

Law 39. Stumped
The batsman can be out stumped (providing the ball is not a no ball) if out of his crease and
the wicket is put down by the wicket keeper without the intervention of another fielder.
If the striker were attempting a run then the decision would be run out and not stumped.
The wicket keeper must have the ball in his hand(s) to complete a stumping.

Law 41. Unfair Play
This Law is complex and covers numerous and specific matters of fair/unfair/dangerous play.
Th Umpire is the sole judge of what is fair/unfair/dangerous.
If you believe that something that occurs falls within your definition of what is unfair etc,

UMPIRING FOR BEGINNERS

then it is unfair etc.

The matters raised on the first page of this paper under The Preamble and the general
preliminary comment form the basis of application of what is fair/unfair/dangerous.

Examples of Signals
5 Penalty runs to the Batting Side Boundary 4 Short Run

No Ball New Ball Revoke Previous Signal

Boundary 6 Wide Leg Bye

Out Bye Dead Ball

UMPIRING FOR BEGINNERS

UMPIRING FOR BEGINNERS

No Ball - Front Foot
No Ball - Back Foot
Fair Delivery

Heel Raised
Examples of No Balls - Placement of the Feet

No Ball - Front Foot

Fair Delivery
Fair Delivery
Fair Delivery
No Ball - Back Foot

Heel Raised

UMPIRING FOR BEGINNERS

Examples of Boundary Construction

Diagram showing some of the various boundary markings, which may be found, on cricket
grounds

************************
Gutter Fence
Flags Line
Posts Rope

EXAMPLES OF LBW

**************************

UMPIRING FOR BEGINNERS
d
Pitched
Pitched outside the
line of Leg stump -
‘Not Out’.
Impacte
d
Pitched Pitched in line, Impacted
in line and would have hit
the stumps - ‘Out’.
Note: The umpire must be
satisfied that the break
will not cause the ball to
pass outside Off Stump.
Impacte
Pitched
Pitched in line,
Impacted in line and
would have hit the
stumps - ‘Out’.

Impacted
Pitched
The point of impact on the
Striker’s person is not in a
straight line between wicket
and wicket. - ‘Not Out’.
Note: As the point of impact
is outside Off Stump the
Striker would be Out if he
made no genuine attempt to
play the ball, provided that
the ball would have hit the
wicket.

I

mpacted
Pitched
The ball, even though
pitched outside the line,
impacted in line and
would have hit the
wicket - ‘Out’.  Note:
The umpire must be
satisfied the ball will not
pass over the top of the
stumps.

Impacted
